## Bach Bacteria

> The prebiotic or abiotic world was not utter chaos, a random confetti of atoms in motion. In particular there were cycles, at many spatio-temporal scales: seasons, night and day, tides, the water cycle, and thousands of chemical cycles discoverable at the atomic and molecular level. Think of cycles as “do-loops” in algorithms, actions that return to a starting point after “accomplishing” something—accumulating something, or moving something, or sorting something, for instance—and then repeating (and repeating and repeating), gradually changing the conditions in the world and thus raising the probability that something new will happen. A striking abiotic example is illustrated by Kessler and Werner in Science 2003.

> In the abiotic world, many similar cycles occur concurrently but asynchronously, wheels within wheels within wheels, with different periods of repetition, “exploring” the space of chemical possibility. This would be a variety of parallel processing, a little bit like the mass production of industry, which makes lots of different parts in different places at different rates of production and then brings them together for assembly, except that this abiotic mass production is utterly unplanned and unmotivated. There is no differential re-production in the abiotic world, but we do get varieties of differential persistence: some temporary combinations of parts hang around longer than others, thereby having more time to pick up revisions and adjustments. The rich can get richer, in short, even though they can’t yet bequeath their riches to descendants. Differential persistence must then somehow gradually turn into differential reproduction.

