---
layout: post
title: 'No-Self'
date: 2020-05-03 00:00:00
excerpt: 'You are nothing and everything'

---

> Prediction is hard - especially about yourself - Adam Green

> To understand the most important ideas in psychology, you need to understand how the mind is divided into parts that sometimes conflict - Jonathan Hadit

Impermanence (Pāli: अनिच्चा aniccā; Sanskrit: अनित्य anitya; Tibetan: མི་རྟག་པ་ mi rtag pa; Chinese: 無常 wúcháng; Japanese: 無常 mujō)

Suffering, unsatisfactoriness (Pāli: दुक्ख dukkha; Sanskrit: दुःख duḥkha; Tibetan: སྡུག་བསྔལ་ sdug bsngal; Chinese: 苦 kǔ; Japanese 苦 ku)

No-self (Pāli: अनत्ता anattā; Sanskrit: अनात्मन् anātman; Tibetan: བདག་མེད་ bdag med; Chinese: 無我 wú-wǒ; Japanese: 無我 muga)
Top

One feature of the human condition is a sense of self, based upon:
- our body
- our story

It is natural for us to feel a sense of self - it is part of the human condition.

> Thus, in the course of his life, one man acquires many personal qualities, many personages, many ‘I’s’ (because each, speaking for itself independently of the others says ‘I,’ ‘me,’ when it appears). Jean Vaysse, Toward Awakening

It's important to clarity is meant by self.  The naive reaction to no-self is nihilism - that the no-self argument is denying existence.  This isn't what no-self means at all.  No-self denies the existence of a separate, inherently existing self.  The kind of self that exists independently of the rest of the universe, the kind of self that gives rise to a 'me and them' attitude.

To define our selves creates separation - me and then everything else.

## The fundamental mistake

So many problems arise from this sense of separation from the world.

This false sense of self causes suffering in many ways.  The most subtle is the difficulty we have of holding up the illusion.  We struggle to keep the story of our life consistent with the past because there is no past.  The past is gone, yet we cling onto it because we need to keep our sense of self alive.

Our sense of self creates temporal connections that don't exist.  We think about past failures as our own.  In reality the person that made those mistakes doesn't exist anymore.  They deserve our compassion, not our guilt.  This disconnection from the failures of your past and today allows you to feel compassion where naturally you feel guilt.

Our sense of self naturally brings about comparisons with others.  The success of our peers makes us feel bad when it should do the opposite.  There is no separation between us and others - the successes of others are our successes.  The pain of others is also our pain. Sharing success is metaphysical support for commitment to a kind life. Sharing pain is a metaphysical support for commitment to a compassionate life.

## Attacking the self

Our separate self causes suffering.  But is it real?


## There are many selves

Self manipulation, self control, talking to yourself, lack of ability to control / predict how you will feel etc

Struggle between thinking and feeling (the conflict between what you should do, want to do & actually do)
- rational vs emotional
- con vs subcon
- elephant and the rider
- modules

## The impermanence argument

The truth of impermanence means that an inherently existing, separate self cannot exist.

## The control argument - the five aggregates

The second vector used to attack the self is that of control.  A useful concept here is the five aggregates, which are the body, our feelings, perception, thoughts and consciousness.  In (WHICH SERMON?) the Buddha systematically examined each of the five aggregates and asks the question - do you have control of this aggregate?

While we have influence over 

Our illusion of control (of both internal and external) smashes into our massive lack of influence in the world inside and outside of us.  Our own subconscious hides infomation, biases the infomation we see and influences us using subtle feeling and emotion.

Cula Saccaka Sutra (king controlling kingdom)

### The body

Replacing gut bacteria is mice can change them from shy to gregarious(Wright)

### Feelings

### Thoughts

### Senses

### Consciousness

## The control argument - the elephant

(elephant in the brain + bach bacteria), kanehaman system 1 & 2, kanehman experiencing and evaluating self  Greene rational & emotional

## Where did you come from?

You are not born, you come out of it - Watts

## Where are you going?

There is no where to go - you stay in the universe (heart sutra)

## Embrace no-self

Accept your thoughts - because they aren’t you.

No self means freedom from the past - freedom from your past selves.

## Not embracing no-self

I was convinced that I was struggling in Europe due to people 'not knowing who I was' - this from a Buddhist who should know better!  There is no true I for them to know.  The idea that the 'true me' was not being appreciated is a 

## Why do we have a self?

Evolution reinforces the sense of self only because separation in needed to drive the test (by competetion) of the generate and test loop that drives evolution.

## More refs

Robert Greebe Human Nature book
From Chapter 5 hacker painter - radiologist who’s eyes linger over site of the cancer, but didn’t conscious recognise it (con vs subcon)
Mental models from Wright

Ego - link to logical fallacies

Get the Alan Watts quote - the past is perpetually vanishing (I think from intor to Buddhism)


Smartphone analogy in Bach Bacteria III

Radiologist example C5 Hacker Painter

No-self section in intro to Middle Length

Can't control subcon, but can control input (ie the context)

Appendix B Emtional Intel
C1 Emtional intel

Maybe I need to have a ‘biology and psychology section? - before the noself section I think
- should talk about the competition in evolution

Small beautiful review - buddhist economics especially


